Once around
Rh36A1. So yes, I do do requests because
somebody asked me to take a look at this
one and very interesting it was
indeed. So what have we got? Well, this
is a star located in the large melanic
cloud, a dwarf galaxy, seen from the
southern hemisphere to be orbiting round
the Milky Way at a distance of 160,000
light years or so. I mean, it's uh
approximate because the large melanic
cloud or LMC is quite large in its own
right. So, uh several thousand light
years across in fact. But buried inside
the LMC, we have the Tarantula Nebula, a
great region of gas and dust and stars
forming out of that material. And right
in the heart of it, shown in this
fantastic picture, we have a star
cluster called the R136 cluster. And
right in the center of that is the star
in question. Here is a highresolution
picture obtained by the very large
telescope, the ESO uh instrument down
there in Chile using adaptive optics
deep inside the center of this R136
cluster. And the star we're talking
about, R136 A1 is dead center
there. Here's a series of images zooming
in from the Tarantula Nebula, zooming in
twice, revealing that star cluster. It's
just amazing that we can get this level
of detail for an object 160,000 light
years away.
So the cluster
RMC136 again shown in this fabulous
image on the right hand side uh was
first identified by observers at the
Radcliffe Observatory in Pritoria back
in the 1960s and given a catalog number
RMC standing for their initials
RMC136 and identified initially as the
central star of the Tarantula
Nebula. instruments have improved. We
now have images like the one you see
here. And in 1979, ESO's 3.6 meter
telescope split R136 into three main
components A, B, and
C. And then eventually we were started
to realize that perhaps something more
complicated was going on. The nature of
this
R136A seemed to suggest that it was so
bright that it had to be a hundred hot
Oclass stars all packed together or one
single star was around 3,000 times the
mass of our sun. And 3,000 times the
mass of the sun didn't seem right.
Didn't seem to be possible. That's
greater than the upper mass limit, which
is a subject of debate, but nowhere near
30,000.
So in fact, instruments were able to
delve further into it and reveal that
R136A was in fact a multiple system and
speckle inter interferometry back in
1985 was all the rage and was able to
identify that there were at least eight
stars within one
arcsec. Um, and the brightest was
R136A1.
So this was pinning it down to a single
object, the subject of this talk. Hubble
Space Telescope went even further and
showed this image of the cluster here
with over 200 bright stars
present. And when I say bright stars,
these really are powerful. Some of them,
they are in fact Wolf Ray stars, the
most powerful class of star that we know
about. So
R136A1 is a classed as
WN5H to be precise. The W for wolf ray
and the other characteristics talking
about its precise nature and spectrum.
This puts it right at the top left hand
corner of the famous Herzbrung Russell
diagram where you plot power output on
the vertical axis and temperature along
the horizontal
axis. It's hot. It's bright and it's
very very massive. Although putting out
huge amounts of stellar winds away from
the star. This is characteristic of
these wolf
rayets. And so they're actually losing
mass quite fast.
They are however incredibly young, very
very vigorous, still in their main
sequence, still fusing hydrogen to
helium in the core and doing so very
rapidly, not just using the proton
proton chain, but using the so-called
CNO catalytic cycle. um the subject of
which we could talk about in another
talk but it's where there is some carbon
and nitrogen and oxygen present and that
can rapidly increase the rate of fusion
of hydrogen to helium through a
catalytic cycle.
And this incredibly high rate of fusion
leads to an enormous energy output and
extreme temperature and the uh expelling
of the outer layers of the star into a
huge envelope. And what that does is get
rid of a lot of the lightweight hydrogen
out of the outer reaches of the star and
reveal the inner workings to some
extent. And we see a lot of helium. We
also see carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen
churned up from inside the core by
convection as the heat is boiling to the
surface. Showing that these stars are
also beginning to turn helium into
heavier elements, carbon, oxygen, and uh
as a byproduct, nitrogen as well.
So the reason that this one is
particularly special is that it is said
to be the most massive star we know of.
Estimates of the mass go from just under
200 to nearly
320. So figures here 1 197 to
315 times the mass of the sun with
265 being the sort of median most widely
accepted value within that range. and
different techniques of mass estimation
seem to produce somewhat different
numbers over that range is quite a
problem. Computing the mass of these
things when we don't see a binary
companion and the mass is going down. It
probably started life with 320 times the
mass of the sun and has been losing
about 50 solar masses every million
years and is about a million and a half
years old. So probably 75 solar masses
or so as the rate is not constant will
have been emitted out into the outer
envelope driven away from the uh solar
wind. That incredibly high uh
temperature driving the outer layers of
the star off with the radiation
pressure. And that radiation pressure is
very extreme indeed. The temperature
we're talking about here on the visible
surface is
46,000 Kelvin, putting the peak of
radiation output way off into the
ultraviolet part of the spectrum. So
it's emitting very powerful photons
indeed. Total power output 4.7 million
times the power output of our sun.
Absolutely incredible. And this is 80%
of its Edington limit. The Edington
limit is the amount
of power output that a star could have
such that the outward radiation pressure
would not unbind the star and that uh
gravity of the mass is able to hold it
together. So this is very extreme
indeed. Um and that's why the outer
layers are being pushed away. And
there's a mathematical formula for what
the Edington limit is which is uh shown
here. 4 pi * g now Newton's gravity
constant times the mass times the speed
of light divided by a constant k which
depends exactly on the composition. But
this only applies if the star is in
thermal equilibrium, which it isn't
because it's actually pushing off out
its outer layers at this enormous rate.
So powerful is it that if you placed
R136A1 where Alpha Centuri is, it would
be as bright as the full moon. That
would be quite incredible in the sky,
wouldn't it?
Now 265 solar
masses, the record holder. Well, that
seems to fly in the face of our models
of star
formation. The process by which
molecular clouds cool and shrink and
accrete together and squeeze their
central regions to
form stars in the middle.
seems to be limited to somewhere in the
range 40 to 60 solar masses. If you try
to build stars that are any larger than
that, then the central region of your
collapsing cloud will ignite as a star
before the rest of the material has
managed to fall in. And when it does so,
the radiation
pressure released from the nuclear
fusion in the core will drive away the
rest of the material. So acting as a
sort of self-limiter. And we can't
really explain stars any more than about
40 to 60 solar masses resulting from
this process. But we do see quite a lot
of stars up to about 150 times the mass
of the sun. So we have to have an
explanation for that. And they're rare,
but maybe they result from a number of
small stars that eventually collide or
spiral into each other in groups and
clusters. And so maybe this is the
result of several stars merging. But
it's a long stretch to get up to 265
solar masses. So there is a bit of a
puzzle over the mass of R136A1.
What will happen to it at such an
extreme mass? Well, we're not sure
because it's a fairly rare situation.
This is the record holder. It seems
likely that it's going to be able to
carry on in the wolf ray stage using its
hydrogen up over a period of 2 million
years or so. Very rapid indeed for such
a huge amount of hydrogen. But in the
process the mass will be reduced all the
way down to about 80 solar masses. That
uh outflow of material really degrades
the overall mass of the star quite
rapidly. So in 2 million years time it's
expected to be down to eight 80 solar
masses. At that point, it will be hot
enough in the very center to trigger off
helium fusion by the triple alpha
process to carbon and on to oxygen. And
those will uh begin to be formed. As
that sudden triggering of helium fusion
ignites, the uh sudden increase in the
power output, the so-called helium flash
will eject the remaining outer layers of
hydrogen out into the envelope,
expanding around the
star. But as it then continues consuming
the remaining helium, this will build up
as a carbon oxygen core in the center.
mass loss will continue. It will start
to stream all the outer layers away
because of the incredible power output.
And only a few hundred,000 years later,
the helium will have all been consumed.
You will have a carbon oxygen core which
will be squeezing so violently in the
center that it will trigger off further
fusion of carbon to neon and onto
silicon and onto iron sulfur. So
elements in
between but that only buys you a few
more thousand years. So a very rapid
process indeed as the star chews through
all the options of energy generation by
nuclear
fusion. And finally having lost yet more
mass it should be down to around 50
solar masses at the final end stage. By
then only 1% of the stars remains will
be either hydrogen or helium. The rest
of it will be a carbon oxygen layer with
other elements deeper inside it all the
way through to an iron core. And it
seems likely then that it will explode
as a
supernova. Now stars of this mass can
explode very violently as gamma ray
bursts. But for that to happen, they
have to be spinning very rapidly so that
they can twist their magnetic fields
into a huge jet and emit gamma radiation
along the jets. But R136A is spinning
relatively slowly and as it gives off
the outer layers, it will slow down. um
the conservation laws of angular
momentum will bring it almost to a halt
and so it's unlikely that it's going to
generate a GRB a gamma ray
burst. What we think it will create is a
supernova and it will be a type one
supernova which is characterized by not
having hydrogen in the spectrum because
it will have ejected pretty much all of
the hydrogen during the uh 2 and a half
million years of its life getting to
this
stage. 3 and a half million years
maybe. And specifically, this will be a
type 1 C because there won't be very
much helium left either. As I said, only
1% of the total mass of the star will
still comprise hydrogen and helium
together. Uh actually, it will be a
carbon star from the outside with a
carbon oxygen layer and other elements
deeper into the core. So, type 1 C and
the types are classified based on not on
the physical process. This is still a
core collapse but uh it's uh from the
spectrum and it's extremely likely that
such a massive star when it collapses
when the core collapses it's going to
generate a black hole directly not a
neutron star. And when this happens, uh
there are various processes that can be
responsible, but it tends to not be
particularly violent and generate a
particularly uh bright event because the
collapse goes directly to a neutron
star.
And one possibility for such violent
collapses is what's called a pair
instability
supernova. The extreme temperatures
reached inside the core create such high
energy gamma rays that they are able to
spontaneously generate electron
anti-electron posetron
pairs out of the vacuum. They rip
spacetime apart creating
these positive posetrons of antimatter
and negative electrons of ordinary
matter. And because they're creating the
mass out of pure energy in this
situation, the total energy of the
system goes down. Some of the energy is
locked up as mass according to
Einstein's equation E= MC^ 2. And that
reduction in the available energy means
there's vastly less pressure suddenly
and so the core collapses. So this is a
somewhat different process to a typical
type two core collapse supernova where
it is the uh electrons and protons
combining to neutrons that drops the
pressure. This is actually gamma
radiation turning into matter in matter
antimatter pairs locking up energy that
causes the pressure to go down and the
core to collapse. And we've got a
diagram on the right here which shows
what happens in terms of the mass of
stars and
the different formation processes that
can occur. So you've got white dwarfs
exploding in the gray there for small
stars when they exceed the Chandraa
limit. You have a very thin strip of
electron capture which we'll talk about
another time. You have neutron star iron
core collapse in the dark blue. You have
black hole formation by fallback. Well,
that's when you create a neutron star
and then material falls back onto it,
tipping it over the Tolman Oppenheimer
Vulkoff limit to create a black hole.
That's in the purple. And in the black,
then we get a direct black hole
formation. And there's even a region of
no remnants down at the bottom there,
which we will come to again in another
talk.
So rather a complicated diagram, but it
tells us according to the solar mass and
the metallicity how much heavier
elements there are present as to exactly
what type of uh supernova we're likely
to get. Now out in the large melanic
cloud, the elemental composition is such
that the metallicity is fairly low.
there aren't very many of the uh heavier
elements beyond helium present and so
this might work for
R136A1 we might get the triggering of a
pair instability supernova but it's a
little unlikely because we would
be armed with a core of 50 solar masses
50 m soul and that's probably too low
for the 64 solar mass limit. That seems
to be where we would end up. Um as
indicated on the diagram here, if you
follow the logarithmic mass scale for
64, that seems to be the lower limit for
um the black region where you get direct
collapse by pair instability.
So, it's uh an interesting one and uh
well, we'll only have to wait a couple
of million years to see it. So, we're
not going to, but somebody might one
day. And maybe we'll find out the answer
before then if we can pin down its mass
more accurately. And that might be about
to happen because the Gemini South
telescope, the 8.1 m telescope in Chile,
has recently taken this fantastic image
of
R136A1, revealing right in the center
there that maybe there is a companion
star. Maybe
R136A1 is in fact a double. Now there's
a chance that it might be a uh just an
alignment of a line of sight effect of
another star. But it's also quite
probable that this is a companion. And
if we can study this well then we might
be able now that we have a binary system
to use Kepler's laws of motion and
figure out the mass of the system much
much more accurately. And we might have
to revise the mass estimates again
because if these two stars are both
present and have both been contributing
to the light output, then maybe we've
overestimated our 136A
um because it's in fact two separate
stars.
But it's probably not too much of an
overestimate because we haven't been
able to see any radial velocity motion
of this star. So it seems likely that
the companion is fairly small in
comparison to the primary and so
probably not contributing a large amount
of mass or a large amount of the light.
But it will let us measure that mass
accurately. And that will give us much
better handle on whether this is in fact
the largest star that we know of and
maybe tell us a bit more about its
future and which type of supernova it's
likely to uh die as. So, thank you very
much for listening. That was once around
R1 136A1, the largest star in the
universe that we know about.